docs: add guide for branching process (#39924)
angular/angular: docs/BRANCHES.md

> # Angular Branching and Verioning: A Practical Guide 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Angular Branching and Versioning: A Practical Guide 
```

> This guide explains how the Angular team manages branches and how those branches interact with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide explains how the Angular team manages branches and how those branches relate to
```

merging PRs and publishing releases. Before reading, you should understand
[Semantic Versioning](https://semver.org/#semantic-versioning-200).

> ## Tags on npm

Reviewer: Before diving into npm tags, I would have a section that describes what branches we maintain, how they are named and what they represent. This seems to me to be the basis for the rest of the discussion in this document. A branch represents that leading edge of development for one of our "release trains" that has a life-cycle of PR merges, releases, deployments and support.

Author: In my mind, the intent of the following section, "Branch naming", is to cover this. I put the note about `npm` tags first because I felt that it provides context that's useful for explaining what the branches mean; you can explain what the `next` and `latest` npm tags mean without knowing anything about the branches, but you can't fully explain what the branches mean without knowing about the npm tags.

Angular's branching relates directly to versions published on npm. We will reference these npm

> tags throughout:  

Reviewer: We should explain that in npm these tags are actually called `dist-tags`.

| Tag    | Description                                                                       |
|--------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| latest | The most recent stable version.                                                   |

> | next   | The most recent pre-release version of Angular for testing. May not always exist. |

Reviewer 2: Okay, sounds good.

| v*-lts | The most recent LTS release for the specified version, such as `v9-lts`.          |

## Branch naming

Angular's main branch is `master`. This branch always represents the absolute latest changes. The

> code on master always represents a pre-release version, often published with the `next` tag on npm.

Reviewer: "often published"? Not "always published"?

Reviewer: I think what you are saying is that the `next` dist-tag does not always map back to the current `master` branch (since we can publish a release-candidate to the `next` dist-tag).

Author: Yeah, there are times when the code on `master` is ahead of `next` (during feature freeze)

> A new branch for a specific version will always be created before that version becomes the `latest`

Reviewer: Without the section suggested above to describe the branches, the term "specific version" is not really defined yet and it is not that clear what it represents.

version on npm.  

Branches for specific versions use the naming scheme matching `(\d)+\.(\d)+\.x`. For example,
the `10.2.x` represents the latest patch changes for releases starting with `10.2.`. The version
tagged on npm as `latest` will always correspond such a branch. We refer to this branch as the
"active patch branch".

## Major releases lifecycle

> Angular releases a major version roughly every six months. Following a major release, we move

Reviewer 2: Sounds good.

> through a consistent lifecycle through the next major release, and repeat. At a high level, this

Reviewer: The life-cycle of a version last longer than the time between major releases. Perhaps this could be reworded to acknowledge this?

process proceeds as follows:

> * A major release occurs. The `master` branch now represents the next minor version.

Reviewer: I think examples would help in this section. The phrase "next minor" is mentioned multiple times but actually refers to different branches in each case.

* Six weeks later, a minor release occurs. The `master` branch now represents the next minor
  version.
* Six weeks later, a second minor release occurs. The `master` branch now represents the next major
  version.
* Three months later, a major release occurs and the process repeats.

### Feature freeze and release candidates

Before publishing minor and major versions as `latest` on npm, they go through a feature freeze and
a release candidate (RC) phase.

"Feature freeze" means that `master` is forked into a branch for a specific version, with no
additional features permitted before releasing as `latest` to npm. This branch becomes the "active

> RC branch". Upon branching, the `master` branch increments to the next minor or major pre-release

Reviewer: I don't think we define "active RC branch" anywhere. I think it would be helpful to do so.

Reviewer: Also there is "active patch branch" that would benefit from a definition.

version. One week after feature freeze, the first RC is published with the `next` tag on npm from

> the active RC branch. Patch bug fixes continue to merge into `master`, the active rc branch, and

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
the active RC branch. Patch bug fixes continue to merge into `master`, the active RC branch, and
```

the active patch branch during this entire period.

One to three weeks after publishing the first RC, the active RC branch is published as `latest` on

> npm and the branch become the active patch branch. At this point there is no active RC branch until

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
npm and the branch becomes the active patch branch. At this point there is no active RC branch until
```

the next minor or major release.  

## Targeting pull requests

> Every pull request has a target branch:

Reviewer: I think "target" is too overloaded in this document to use it here.
Instead we could use the term that GitHub uses which is the "base branch", saving "target" for the `major`, `minor`, `patch` PR labelling.

{insert screenshot here}

This branch represents the latest branch that will receive the change. Most pull requests should
target `master`. However, some changes will explicitly target an earlier branch, such as `11.1.x`,
in order to patch an older version. Specific GitHub labels, described below, control the
additional branches into which a pull request will be cherry-picked.

### Labelling pull requests

There are five labels that target PRs to versions:
 
| Label         | Description                                                                 |
|---------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| target: major | A change that includes a backwards-incompatible behavior or API change.     |
| target: minor | A change that introduces a new, backwards-compatible functionality.         |
| target: patch | A backwards-compatible bug fix.                                             |

> | target: rc    | A change that should be explicitly included in an active release candidate. |

Reviewer: Can we clarify which branches would receive such a labelled PR? Does this PR also get cherry-picked to `master` and patch?

Author: IMO this is best covered by the "Pull request examples" section below since it depends on the PR's base branch. My intent for this section is to describe the quality of the change for each label rather than comprehensively listing where they end up, since the tool mostly takes care of that.

| target: lts   | A critical security or browser compatibility fix for LTS releases.          |

Every PR must have exactly one `target: *` label. Angular's dev tooling will merge a pull request
into its target branch and then cherry-pick the commits to the appropriate branches based on the
specified label.

The vast majority of pull requests will target `major`, `minor`, or `patch` based on the contents of
the code change. In rare cases, a pull request will specify `target: rc` or `target: lts` to
explicitly target a special branch.

Breaking changes marked with `target: major` can only be merged when `master` represents the next
major version.

### Pull request examples

> | I want to...                                                | Target branch           | Target label | Your change will land in...                                                                                                  |

Author: Yeah, there are invalid combinations, though I think your example might be valid. E.g. base branch of `10.2.x` with `target: major` would be invalid. Do you think it's worth explicitly calling that out?

| Make a non-breaking bug fix                                 | `master`                | `patch`      | `master`, the active patch branch, and the active RC branch if there is one                                                  |
| Introduce a new feature                                     | `master`                | `minor`      | `master` (any time)                                                                                                          |
| Make a breaking change                                      | `master`                | `major`      | `master` (only when `master` represents the next major version)                                                              |
| Make a critical security fix                                | `master`                | `lts`        | `master`, the active patch branch, the active RC branch if there is one, and all branches for versions within the LTS window |
| Bump the version of an RC                                   | the active RC branch    | `rc`         | The active RC branch                                                                                                         |

> | Fix an RC bug for a major release feature                   | `master`                | `rc`         | `master` and the active rc branch                                                                                            |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| Fix an RC bug for a major release feature                   | `master`                | `rc`         | `master` and the active RC branch                                                                                            |
```

# Angular Branching and Versioning: A Practical Guide

This guide explains how the Angular team manages branches and how those branches relate to with
merging PRs and publishing releases. Before reading, you should understand
[Semantic Versioning](https://semver.org/#semantic-versioning-200).

## Distribution tags on npm

Angular's branching relates directly to versions published on npm. We will reference these [npm
distribution tags](https://docs.npmjs.com/cli/v6/commands/npm-dist-tag#purpose) throughout:

| Tag    | Description                                                                       |
|--------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| latest | The most recent stable version.                                                   |
| next   | The most recent pre-release version of Angular for testing. May not always exist. |
| v*-lts | The most recent LTS release for the specified version, such as `v9-lts`.          |

## Branch naming

> Angular's main branch is `master`. This branch always represents the absolute latest changes. The

Reviewer 4: While I understand that changing the name of the main branch away from `master` would be difficult, I think we should consider it.

Reviewer 2: It is something we are considering/planning but is its own project/effort.  It is already present as a project in our prioritization queue.

> code on master always represents a pre-release version, often published with the `next` tag on npm.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
code on `master` always represents a pre-release version, often published with the `next` tag on npm.
```

> A new branch for a specific version will always be created before that version becomes the `latest`

Reviewer: Perhaps...

```suggestion
A new branch for a specific version (that increments the major or minor value) will always be created before that version becomes the `latest`
```

Author: I like using "version increment" here, I think that's much clearer than what I had before. I reworded to this:
```markdown
Angular's main branch is `master`. This branch always represents the absolute latest changes. The
code on master always represents a pre-release version, often published with the `next` tag on npm.

For each minor and major version increment, a new branch is created. These branches use a naming
scheme matching `\d+\.\d+\.x` and receive subsequent patch changes for that version range. For
example, the `10.2.x` represents the latest patch changes for subsequent releases starting with
`10.2.`. The version tagged on npm as `latest` will always correspond to such a
branch, referred to as the "active patch branch".
```

version on npm.  

Branches corresponding to specific published versions use the naming scheme matching
`\d+\.\d+\.x`. For example, the `10.2.x` represents the latest patch changes for releases

> starting with `10.2.`. The version tagged on npm as `latest` will always correspond to such a

Author: I think it actually does apply to pre-releases? We do still cherry-pick `target: patch` changes to feature-freeze/RC branches. Otherwise, we'd end up in a situation where e.g. `10.2.5` has bug fixes that are then missing from `11.0.0`, which would be a regression.

> starting with `10.2.`. The version tagged on npm as `latest` will always correspond to such a

Reviewer 3: What I meant is that `10.2.0-next.1` will be released from master at which point there will be no `10.2.x` branch. So, before we enter feature-freeze for a particular version, the latest patch changes for the release starting with `<X>.<Y>.` will not be on an `<X>.<Y>.x` branch (since there won't be one yet) but on master.

Maybe that is too specific and not worth mentioning here.

> starting with `10.2.`. The version tagged on npm as `latest` will always correspond to such a

Author: Ah, I see. My phrase "specific published versions" is really only describing non-prerelease versions. However, I think saying "10.2.x represents the latest patch changes for releases starting with 10.2." is still accurate since, by the time the 10.2.x branch exists, `master` would already be pointing to `11.0.0-next.0`.

branch, referred to as the "active patch branch".

## Major releases lifecycle

Angular releases a major version roughly every six months. Following a major release, we move

> through a consistent lifecycle through the next major release, and repeat. At a high level, this

Reviewer: ```suggestion
through a consistent lifecycle to the next major release, and repeat. At a high level, this
```

* Six weeks later, we publish `11.2.0` and `master` represents `12.0.0`.
* Three months later, this cycle repeats with the publication of `12.0.0`.

### Feature freeze and release candidates

Before publishing minor and major versions as `latest` on npm, they go through a feature freeze and
a release candidate (RC) phase.

"Feature freeze" means that `master` is forked into a branch for a specific version, with no
additional features permitted before releasing as `latest` to npm. This branch becomes the "active
RC branch". Upon branching, the `master` branch increments to the next minor or major pre-release
version. One week after feature freeze, the first RC is published with the `next` tag on npm from
the active RC branch. Patch bug fixes continue to merge into `master`, the active RC branch, and
the active patch branch during this entire period.

One to three weeks after publishing the first RC, the active RC branch is published as `latest` on
npm and the branch becomes the active patch branch. At this point there is no active RC branch until
the next minor or major release.

## Targeting pull requests

Every pull request has a **base branch**:

> {insert screenshot here}

Reviewer: Don't forget to do this 😄

Author: Good reminder. Added.

> This branch represents the latest branch that will receive the change. Most pull requests should

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This base branch represents the latest branch that will receive the change. Most pull requests should
```

specify `master`. However, some changes will explicitly use an earlier branch, such as `11.1.x`,
in order to patch an older version. Specific GitHub labels, described below, control the
additional branches into which a pull request will be cherry-picked.

### Labelling pull requests

There are five labels that target PRs to versions:
 
| Label         | Description                                                                 |
|---------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| target: major | A change that includes a backwards-incompatible behavior or API change.     |
| target: minor | A change that introduces a new, backwards-compatible functionality.         |
| target: patch | A backwards-compatible bug fix.                                             |
| target: rc    | A change that should be explicitly included in an active release candidate. |
| target: lts   | A critical security or browser compatibility fix for LTS releases.          |

> Every PR must have exactly one `target: *` label. Angular's dev tooling will merge a pull request
> into its target branch and then cherry-pick the commits to the appropriate branches based on the
> specified label.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Every PR must have exactly one `target: *` label. The pull request will be merged into its target branch
and then the commits will be cherry-picked  to the appropriate branches based on the specified label.
```

Author: Changed to
```markdown
Every PR must have exactly one `target: *` label. Angular's dev tooling will merge the pull request
into its base branch and then cherry-pick the commits to the appropriate branches based on the
specified target label.
```
Since "The pull request will be merged" is more passive voice

The vast majority of pull requests will target `major`, `minor`, or `patch` based on the contents of
the code change. In rare cases, a pull request will specify `target: rc` or `target: lts` to
explicitly target a special branch.

> Breaking changes marked with `target: major` can only be merged when `master` represents the next

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Breaking changes, marked with `target: major`, can only be merged when `master` represents the next
```

Is this more accurate?  Expressing that breaking changes can only go into a next major version, and that it is noted with the `target: major` label

|-------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------|--------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Make a non-breaking bug fix                                 | `master`                | `patch`      | `master`, the active patch branch, and the active RC branch if there is one                                                  |
| Introduce a new feature                                     | `master`                | `minor`      | `master` (any time)                                                                                                          |
| Make a breaking change                                      | `master`                | `major`      | `master` (only when `master` represents the next major version)                                                              |
| Make a critical security fix                                | `master`                | `lts`        | `master`, the active patch branch, the active RC branch if there is one, and all branches for versions within the LTS window |

> | Bump the version of an RC                                   | the active RC branch    | `rc`         | The active RC branch                                                                                                         |

Reviewer 2: I think we shouldn't include this entry as this is an automated task.   Additionally, it is something only done internally by the core team and I don't think it needs its own entry here.
